#   Sysmon - System Monitoring CLI Tool - Design doc

**Language:** Python

**Dates:** 15/03, 16/03, 28/03, 29/03

---

## Abstract Idea

A command-line tool that tracks CPU, memory, network, and disk usage in real time and displays live metrics of them in the terminal with a clean, colored interface. The tool additionally logs historical data to a file, which may be formated for both CSV and JSON for its output. Moreover, the tool may optionally alert the user with a desktop message when a certain metric in the cpu or memory exceeds its threshold, and aside from displaying and logging metrics, a user can instead ask for a report by date on min/max/avg of certain metrics.

## Abstract Architectural Design
What I have in mind is a collector.py that has in it functions that collect system data using the psutil API, a display.py that when ordered, displays with a not-eye-soring interface the system reading it gets using rich API, a logger.py that when a system reading occurs, logs the readings in a line formatted as JSON or CSV, a report.py that stores in it functions that create a daily report by reading a specified log file, a warning_handling.py that when ordered, makes sure if a value in a system reading exceeded its threshold- a pop-up message will be displayed to the user. Last but not least there is main.py, serving as an entry point for the program, and handles CLI input and error messages.

Abstractly talking (in the time of typing i still didn't finish programming everything, but just the core), I changed my mind many many times on a few architectural ideas of what's "right" to do, especially in how each module is dependent on another.
I am fully aware that one of the most important architectural aspects of said exercise is to plan a project with many **independent** modules, therefore i didn't find it right when I used display.py to order other modules to do things, as essentialy it was the one who got the data from the collector.py, as essentialy in display.py we have the infinite loop of calling for the system metrics. As of typing, im quite confident the "correct" design for this project that is conceptually event oriented yet makes each module independent, is a design where main handles the requests from one module to another- so each module will only know main and not all of the others' internals. For example when display needs every 2 seconds a new reading, it asks for it not from collector, but from main, which has a function of getting all the readings, and additionaly calls logger to log them, which makes display.py only display the readings and not ask now for logger or collector. Moreover, im more confident it's conceptually ok because main is the one holding the variables from the input, like per say the logging file path, therefore it is the one who should order logger when to log and not other modules. What I'll do is a function in main called get_readings() that will be asked for from display every x seconds, and will give back the readings, in addition to logging them, in addition to checking if one exceeds the thresholds-- each action is a call to a different module.

Another thought i had stuck in my head when starting to code the foundation was whether collector.py should be the one making the data more string-y (like adding a % to percentage), addings GB or MB or KB depending on the bytes, or should it be display. After many many many self questions i think that as long as the data is not a percentage we should send it as it is, and display will handle this. I made an additional module that both display and collector use called modify_metrics.py that converts bytes to normal metric sizes, adds mbps for network speed, etc.

## Bugs Along the Way
I had a thing when i finished display and had a grid of 4 different tables, because of the 4 different tables in 4 different collumns the CLI started flickering, at first i thought it was because every x seconds the cpu calculates the network speed is the source of the problem, but after testing with/without tables and calculations- that the problem stems from having 4 different tables on 4 diff collumns. so instead i changed the grid to have 2 rows in each one 2 collumns. now it fits good with no flickering


## Drafts
**basically like all of my thoughts piled here to be organized soon. I really recommend not reading, it's the unclear and unorganized thoughts I've had throughout working on this project.**

this is the beginning of the drafts- at the moment of writing i just finished reading most of the resources for the exercise, read and tried using psutil, rich and argparse. ill try the pytest later when ive coded a foundation.. I'll start with vomiting all thoughts i have on the project. Architecture wise I want it to have in collector.py functions that use the API to get the data on metrics and return it as lists,tuples,strings. I'm still not sure if i should return them from collector (the metrics) as numbers (or lists of numbers) or as strings.. i also want to organize a table of what metrics?

| Metric                                    | What function do i use                        | additional notes! things that stuck out for me from the research phase                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Memory                                    | psutil.virtual_memory()                       | i need to return 3 values, 2 of them are originally taken from the psutil function as bytes, therefore i should convert them to MB or GB or whatever using bytes2human. that means i need to return it as string which i don't see as a horrible thing. does that mean i should return percentage as a string too? what about the percentages in CPU usage for example? maybe i will return as a string and have 1 function that will convert to percent.<br/> |
| Disk usage (per-partition)                | psutil.disk_partitinos(), psutil.disk_usage() |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| CPU usage (per-core)                      | psutil.cpu_percent(percpu=True)               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| CPU usage (per-aggregate)                 | psutil.cpu_percent(percpu=False)              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Network (upload speed and download speed) | psutil.net_io_counters()                      | for each speed i need to extract different values from the tuple, and calculate the speed wit the formula (current bytes - previous bytes) / (time interval). overall that means ill need to return the current bytes back to who requested the function for it to send it back next time they want to find network speed (as previous bytes)                                                                                                                  |
i see i need to accept a '--interval' flag to set polling frequency -> ill get it as a parameter whose default will be 2 seconds.
after a rough 30 mins of coding and thinking- the interval parameter won't be in the collector but rather in the display. this is because for the psutil functions to work every [interval] seconds as the user intends, rather than passing the parameter into the psutil functions (what i initially thought was possible after a glance on psutil.cpu_percent- which isn't for the rest of the functions), i should instead have a while loop from the display that gets from collector all the parameters and puts it on the monitor, then waits [interval] seconds to begin over to refresh. does that mean the function for checking interval should be in display? i really don't think so especially because i get the parameter initially in main, whcih is supposed to be THE place to check and parse inputs with the argparse module. In the func psutil.virtual_memory() i don't want to display the total and used parameters as bytes, as it won't be clear for the naked eye. I'd rather use bytes2human to convert it to more clear numbers
when coding collector i ask myself sometimes if id rather return as string or return as values.. for now because i need to add little tweaks in collector to the values like add "%" for percentage or add "MB/GB" to a value that it's better for them to be returned as string also for display not to be about converting value types.
thinking abt it rn i need to do each module independent and that it should not know that the others exist- at least from what ive understood. then it's not all too well that i'm asking in display.py for functions from collector.py. at lest that's how i interpreted it. therefore i should have some main functions that use collector display will call when it needs. also then i resolve the problem of whether i should or should not return in collector metrics as strings- in main ill make them strings. no i regret it because it's just copying function calls but in a different module, that is also supposed to have a specific objective. i think that independent module means that it **does not impact** other modules, but it's ok if **it's depended on other modules**
notable bug- cli display flickers after i made the networks table. bug is not because i added a network table- at first i thought it was because of hard calculations- after adding and removing tables, collumns, etc i found out regardless of which 1 table i remove it's back to being ok. maskana= grid cant handle udpating 4 tables every time. solved! honestly im so proud of myself it's a rush of dopamine basically found out that because it's 4 in 4 diff collums or per say 3 diff collumns and then 1 diff row (4 rows/col total) it's flickering. however if i only have 2 rows with each having 2 tables we're all good. and it looks so pretyyyyyy 

##sources
argparse tutorial (https://docs.python.org/3/howto/argparse.html#argparse-tutorial)
how to write good design doc (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bgHL41e7vgI)
psutil API tutorial (https://psutil.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html)
https://appdividend.com/how-to-format-float-values-in-python/
